my direction and we have so far identified the
processes how to do it when we were talking about
doing this comprehensive planning process we
also were wanting to have this whole process
endorsed by the Planning Commission and by the
City Council So we went through a long and tedious
course of getting a resolution out of the city
council. The city council has finally signed a
resolution endorsing our process, but given us a
mandate to produce a document, what we call
planning policy manual, identifying why we're
doing it, how we're doing it, with what kind of
help, and it's a very detailed piece of document.
This piece of document was sent to the Planning
Commission for approval. And also in, I think
January of 87, we've gotten the approval from the
Planning Commission. So here's a copy for your
review. I thank you. So the process now is that the
Planning Department will do the
sector plan. There will be about 23 sectors
identified for areas inside the city limit,
outside the city limit, into the ETJ. Really, in
our sector division, the city limit is rather
transparent because we feel like that really has
not that much control over how development should
happen.
We sort of negated that. And also, Houston's taken
a pretty forthright stand with regard to
development in the ETJ, too, historically. Yes.
Recently, we had a little bit more teeth. I think
the last legislature provided us with plaque
review power. Ephraim keeps saying that if any
commissioner county judge that would locate a
development outside of the city limit in there. In
our ETJ, without the planning department's
approval, we can bring lawsuits and it's really a
misdemeanor offense according to the
legislation. One thing I wanted to mention, Joe,
was your neighborhood planning areas are the
immediate in town areas surrounding the CBD.
That's correct. That's usually the case when you
talk about community development areas, mostly
in the older neighborhoods surrounding the CBD,
so to speak. However, we did identify the CBD
itself as a part of the sector planning process.
Part of the reason is there is not enough residents
in that area to be included into the CD eligible
situation. Who is in charge of the C.D. areas?
Roberta Burroughs, another assistant director.
Okay. I want to give her credit, too. Yes.
Roberta, you know, you know Roberta, who is now the
chapter, state chapter's, is she president or
vice president or something? One of the officers.
Well, one of the officers. And there you have your
comprehensive planning process. Well, that's
part of the summary that I was looking for just now
for you. If you want to, we can read through it
quickly, or you can go back and write it out from
what I gave you later on. Well, we can get a summary,
and then I can refer to that. So we are now in the
process, as you see the other map, there's sector
lines drawn and there's 23 sectors identified. We
have also a report for sector boundary plan.
Somewhere along the line, the question was raised
that whether the department was arbitrarily
drawing some lines to divide them up into sectors.
and we have made a report and distributed it to the
various groups for review and we did have some
rather legitimate comments that would cause us to
maybe change some of the sector lines. We do not
want to divide neighborhoods and things like
that. Well, when you say under your comprehensive
planning documents that you're going to have
neighborhood plans, sector plans, and summary
plans, for example, what do you mean when you say
neighborhood plans? What kind of plans? There
will be elements there, won't there, of plans?
Yes, neighborhood plans will be the plans that
will be within the city area first.
Location-wise, that is a specific item. Well,
like what? For example, Fourth Ward. Okay, but
what kind of, what will the plan show? The plans
will show the redevelopment strategies, the
existing conditions, and so on and so forth. It
will be slightly different than the sector plan.
The sector plan, like I said, will identify the
infrastructure needs to handle the new
development, While the neighborhood plan will
identify the efficiency in the infrastructure in
terms of redevelopment. Well, you mentioned
infrastructure. Is that just one example? That's
one example. That could be sewer line, water line,
street. Yeah, but I know what infrastructure is.
But what about things other than infrastructure?
We will also identify that. We will try to study the
housing conditions. We will study the social
conditions of the area. It will be a complete plan
now. And transportation. Transportation. Land
use configuration. Land use configuration. Both
of them. These will all be elements. All be
elements of both reports, but will be looked at
from a different angle, so to speak. We do have in
the policy manual a... table of contents for each
of the reports that we have for each kind of the
report that we're going to do. The neighborhood
plan report or the sector plan report. And it's all
identified in the policy menu. I would like for you
to review it and maybe give me some comments. from
the academic... You don't know what you're
saying. We welcome all comments, but we would take
that easily. Yes, I know. Okay, the sector
planning process has come to a point where we have
divided the sector and make a sector plan report.
Here's a copy. What it is, is because the way we have
publicize this planning process, it has become a
very visible type of situation and we want to make
sure all along the planning process, everything
we do is out in the open with the citizens of Houston
so that they have a chance to comment on it. Now also
in the... That's a departure in itself. That's a
major departure. Yes. And I think it's probably
good for the If we want to develop some plan that
will be accepted, I think we have to be involved
with the residents and whatever people. Secret
planning is never successful. Right. And in our
planning policy manual, we also have identified
the procedures, how we're going to do each plan. We
have a critical path chart made up We have
identified that there will be at least two public
hearings on location. In each of the sectors. In
each of the sectors. And we will also involve a
group called Technical Advisory Committee,
which is made up of professional people who may or
may not live in the area. This group, for example,
are AIA, APA, ASCM, who have some general
expertise of what city's development and growth
and planning is all about and should they have
their own individual as a group idea of how it
should be carried out. You get a lot of free advice
that way. Well, we get a lot of free advice and we
also have, when we get done, we will also have a lot
of concurrence from these people to support the
plans. Oh, absolutely. They're providing you
technical advice. If we don't, we would have to
justify why we don't. And if we do it, we also have to
justify within ourselves why we take that. We also
have formed a staff task force. This is the
technical task force within all the departments
of the City of Houston and some of the governmental
agencies. in this metropolitan area. We will be
calling our people like the flood control
district, county engineer's office, HGAC, total
authority, highway department, all the people
that could provide us with technical expertise
and are out there maybe doing their own long-term
plans, so to speak. The highway department has a
20-year plan. I just picked up something from them
so that we would incorporate all this and chat with
them as we go along in doing this plan. We will have a
public hearing at the very beginning to tell the
residents of the area that we're coming out to do a
plan for this area. We want their support. We want
their comments and review, and we will be getting
back to them either as a group. We call them
neighborhood-based association this could be
the civic organizations or the area association
which is the developers organization
or as individual interested individuals who will
maintain contact with them all along and we have
identified a planning time period of maybe 18 to 20
months for each of the plans which is a ambitious
timetable when you think of all these public
meetings that we have to go through, but I think if
we do it right, we could probably get done. So, and
also... You said there are 23? There are 23 of them.
We are in the process of hiring professionals to be
the project planner for each one of these, but we
don't anticipate going to work on all 23. We would
probably stagger them, and we would say for 18
months for each plane, it might take us as much as
four to five years to complete all 23. That sounds
reasonable. We don't want to, you know, yeah. We
want to make sure that what we're doing is
reasonable. And also, when we get all this, you
call it puzzle type of, When we get all these pieces
of puzzle put together. Cut and paste. Cut and
paste. I'd rather say puzzle. It's a mystery. But
when we get all done, we will have an entire picture
together. And part of the reason we wanted to do
summary plans is we know that for certain elements
of planning, such as transportation, parks and
recreation, you almost have to bring it back
together, the whole piece for the region. You want
to make sure that when you go through one sector to
another, it's in line and continuous. But in
general, you still want to look at the picture in
one piece of document. Well, I think that any
legislative body insists on it eventually.
Right. So we do see that as the next step, so to
speak. As soon as we finish the sectors and the
neighborhoods, We will be, if we have the luxury of
extra staff, we might start that process early.
Now the economic condition of the city did put a
crunch to our dream. Mayor Whitmer said she's
going to do some more firing. Hopefully we'll not
involve any planning department personnel
unless it's really a bad person, a bad employee.
Well, you don't have any of those.
Now that we've gone through your process, I think
we've pretty well finished with that, haven't we?
Yeah. Okay. It's my understanding that Ephraim is
being criticized currently for not spending
federal dollars quickly enough. And this is
probably unfair criticism. Would you care to
comment on that? We
inherited an office at the mayor's office that has
not been
100% efficient, so to speak. Which office was
that? The Climate Development. Oh, yeah. Okay,
and they were having problems. In fact, before we
inherited, there was lawsuits against the
director of the office and so on and so forth.
Lawsuits? Well...
What's her name? Was even indicted. Later on was
taken off. She was... You didn't know about Audie?
No, I don't think so. Well, we could probably talk
about those later on, but... But we inherited a
department that is problem-ridden, that has not
been able to spend all the CD money, so to speak, on
projects. And as time goes on, the HUD offices were
looking at what year money we haven't spent and how
much money we have spent currently and all that.
And they discovered that we have so many that's
data back as far as three, four years ago that
haven't been spent. And I guess to teach us a
lesson, they want to come back and say, well, if you
can't spend it, you don't deserve it. That
doesn't go over well with the legislative body. It
never goes over well with the legislative body
when that happens. Whether it's a dollar or a
million dollars. So Ephraim has to answer some
questions. Yes. Well, that's what he's paid for,
isn't
it? Yes. Personally, I think through the planning
department, through the year of Mayor Welch and
the directorship of Roscoe Jones has regressed I
wouldn't, I don't want to use the word
deteriorated, but regressed in our function,
okay, and maybe also because of the
public works department had taken a lot of the
responsibility away from us with a strong
director in the person of the
You can put
it in the transcript. Anyway, so that's the
situation. I think we now are having a hard time to
recapture some of the traditional planning
functions that the planning department should
carry out. Let me ask you one question that I've
never been clear about. How does the city of
Houston administer deed restrictions between
private property owners and private parties? Is
the city a party to any of those agreements? The
city is not a party to any of those agreements.
However, the city is ready to assist any citizen
groups that might have problems with somebody
within their group so to speak violating the
restriction the legal department has provided
legal assistance to the neighborhood
associations who want to administer the
restriction the planning department has
provided technical support in studying the
situation and reporting back to the legal
department We will not initiate any action here
without requests from the citizens. Another
question. The subject of transfer of development
rights, could you elaborate a little bit on that as
it's practiced in Houston? The only transfer of
development right that I can think of is the
transfer of sewer capability. Sewer connection.
Sewer connection, okay. Sewer availability.
That is the result of having restrictions in the
capacities in the treatment plant in the general
Houston area. And so it was identified that within
a sewer district, we have so much capacity And this
capacity is distributed to the vacant land or
being purchased by the vacant land owners, so to
speak, when they put in a certain development of
sewer capacity money. I think it's $1.86 a gallon
or something like that at one time. When we were
really doing high growth, I don't think now
there's a problem. Also, because a lot of the
expansion and new treatment plants are coming
online that we don't have, we have a slowdown in
development. We have an increase of capacity. So
it's not a problem. But the transfer development
is really about the sewer capacity. For a while,
there was quite a business going in the purchase
and sale of sewer connections. That's what I
heard. That's what I heard also. It was becoming
quite a game in town.
Joe, when the plan is completed in four or five or
however many years, then how do you anticipate
it's being implemented?
Part of the cell that we are doing for the sector
plan is that when we identify problems
and identify solutions to that we will add that
physical solution if it's for example like a
street improvement we will make recommendations
to the capital improvement committee we identify
it in the plan And it's part of the idea from Ephraim
that any project that's identified by this plan
that's finally accepted by the planning
commissioner and endorsed by the planning
commissioner and accepted by the city council. We
will go through all this. In fact, we'll let our
transmitters and all that. It will be similar to a
planning document from any other yeah well let's
assume the plan has been adopted by the city
council right and then what so the project that's
identified in the plan would be pulled out and
recommended to the capital improvement
committee for action now there are three or four
ways that projects can get into the capital Well,
Capital Improvement Committee. Well, let's not
go into that, but that would take care of the public
sector. Right. Right. What about the private
sector? Private sector, hopefully, that these
plans will be something that they look at as far as
the development of, like I said, infrastructure
to support their development. If they want to
build a million square feet of office building in a
certain area and we haven't identified to them the
necessary sewer capacity or street system to
support that, then they might hopefully want to
look at some other areas that we already have
identified that kind of improvement there. Or
they can come back in and the traditional way is to
say that we will help you develop this capability
in that area so that we can develop our project.
That is perfectly acceptable as far as I
understand it. What if they come in with a proposal
that is within the overall densities prescribed,
but the use is not what the plan anticipates? We
will not identify by parcel what use will be
assigned. No, no, no. I'm not suggesting by
parcel. I'm suggesting that the plan would
probably be far more general than that. That's
correct. I would doubt if you'd ever want to get
down to the parcel. No. That would probably be a
mistake. Right. But even so, even for an area, a
neighborhood area and so forth, that a developer
could conceivably come in with a proposal for uses
that would not be even compatible with what's
there now, or with what the city has adopted.
Okay, you're on. Okay. What should I say to that? I
don't know. What do you say to it? How would the city
handle a situation of an incompatible use
proposal? Hopefully we could go back and talk to
them first to tell them why We identify that as...
This would be friendly persuasion. That's
probably about the limit of that. Now, I'm sure if
we identify a wetland area or an area within a
100-year floodplain... Well, that's something
else, yeah. Let's assume this is all developable
land, all level and ready to go. Then we would
probably have...
We would have no way
to really stop a project at this time now. A few
years from now, I don't know, maybe there would be
other legislative power that's given to us. At
least, maybe I've never given a whole lot of
thought to that particular issue.
Better. Yes. Do you have anything like site plan
review? Yes, we have now development plan review.
You do. But that's mainly about looking at whether
it's compatible to the right-of-way lines that we
have set out and so on and so forth. Do you have any
landscaping requirements? I think there's some
minimum landscaping requirements, but... I
think one of the things that we may be starting to
look at is to evaluate some merits of projects. I
hate to say it, like what you call when a developer
has to pay a certain amount to improve the school
system, what's going on. Or contribute to a park
that's not property. Right. So like what's going
on in Los Angeles, California area, that might be
something for us to look at for the future. Well, of
course, the College Station test case certainly
verified that in terms of park contributions.
And by extension that could be done for anything
that was a valid community service or facility,
needed facility, which was caused by the
development being constructed. Right. Part of
the work that the data system is working on is
hopefully with our METRICOM computerized
database, extending it out to the ETJ would be able
to do some of these kind of studies for certain
projects, like anybody could come in At a certain
size, we would have some capability of looking at
the impact to the neighborhood, impact to the
street system, to the sewer system, and all that.
Schools. Right, right. Libraries. Exactly. Fire
and police. Exactly.
Joel, if you can think of anything else that you
want to add or something you want to delete, mark it
up on the transcript that we'll be mailing you as
soon as I can get it transcribed. Sure. Thank you
very much for your time. You're welcome. And for
sharing your vast knowledge with us in this
important project. I believe that you probably
have as much seniority as almost anyone in the
department here now, don't you? I have more
seniority than Ephraim.
You've been here 16 years? Since December of 72,
after I graduated. Have you given any thought to
working elsewhere? Well, at this time I think I'm
landing on a project I would really want to get
done. I don't blame you. It would take me five years
to get it done. I would stay for five years. Sure.
It's really going to be a good project, and the key
to it is how good a staff I can assemble. Yeah, well,
it sounds potentially very exciting. Yes,
exactly, and it's something that I always want to
do. Well, you've waited a long time to be able to do
it. Through the years, we have published some good
reports, and I feel like at times I have done some
things that is being taken, and it's rewarding.
You know, the planners don't see the fruit of their
labor, so to speak, like a building from
architect. Well, that's why we have to maintain
good health so we live long enough to see these
things. Yes. Thanks very much, Joe. Thank you.